


Chap. XV.—Of the verb "to Have."

1. Having predicated in many ways.
1. Quality.To have, is predicated in many modes;[73] either as habit and disposition or some other quality, for we are said to have knowledge and virtue; 2. Quantity.
or as to quantity, as the size which any one has; thus he is said to have the size of three or four cubits; 3. Investiture.
4. In a part.
5. As to a part.
6. In measure.or as things about the body, as a garment or a tunic;[74] or as in a part, as a ring in the hand; or as a part, as the hand or the foot; or as in a vessel, as a bushel has wheat, or a flagon, wine, for the flagon is said to have[75] the wine, and the bushel the wheat; all these therefore are said to have, as in a vessel; 7. Possession.or as a possession, for we are said to have a house or land.
A man is also said to have a wife, and the wife a husband, but the mode now mentioned, of "to have," seems the most foreign, 8. Also indirectly or by analogy.for we mean nothing else by having a wife, than that she cohabits with a man; there may perhaps appear to be some other modes of having, but those usually mentioned have nearly all been enumerated.




Notes

 Categories, or Predicaments, so called because they concern things which may always be predicated, are the several classes under which all abstract ideas, and their signs, common words, may be arranged. Their classification under ten heads was introduced by Archytas and adopted by Aristotle. The reason why, in this treatise about them, Aristotle does not begin from these, but from Homonyms, &c., is that he might previously explain what was necessary to the doctrine of the Categories to prevent subsequent digression. Vide Porphyr. in Prædicam. After comparing various opinions of Alexander Aphrodisiensis, Syrianus, Simplicius, and others, it appears agreed by all, that Aristotle's intention in this treatise was, to discuss simple primary and general words, so far as they are significant of things; at the same time to instruct us in things and conceptions, so far as they are signified by words. A recollection of this digested explanation, will much assist the student in the enunciation of the plan.
 "Homonyms," equivocal words,—"Synonyms," univocal,—"Paronyms," derivative. We may remark here, that analogous nouns constitute only one species of equivocal: that the synonyms of Aristotle must be distinguished from the modern synonyms, which latter are defined by Boethius, "those which have many names, but one definition;" and lastly, that paronyms have been limited by the schoolmen to certain concrete adjectives, a limitation which is not warranted by Aristotle, and is expressly rejected by his Greek commentators.—Mansel's Rudiments of Logic. See also Simplicius Scholia, p. 43, b. 5. "The reason," says Syrianus, "why things polyonomous, and heteronomous, are omitted by Aristotle, is because they rather pertain to ornament of diction, than to the consideration of things; they are therefore more properly discussed in the Rhetoric and Poetics."
 Taylor translates λόγος sometimes "reason," at others "definition." It is better to preserve the latter as far as may be, though the student will do well to remember that it is capable of both significations. The brackets are retained from the Leipsic and other copies.
 Οὐσία, "a thing sufficient of itself to its own subsistence." Taylor. He translates it "essence," rather than "substance," because this latter word conveys no idea of self-subsistence. See his Introduction of Porphyry. It must be observed, however, that whilst by continued abstraction from the subject and different predicates of Propositions, the predicates arrive at the nine other categories, the subject will ultimately end in "substance." Cf. Phys. Ausc. lib. iii.
 This chapter, containing the several divisions of terms, into absolute and connotative, abstract and concrete, respectively, has presented endless difficulties to commentators; and the question of relation seems as far from being settled as ever. The whole subject may perhaps be properly condensed in the following manner. All ὄντα are divided by Aristotle into four classes, Universal and Singular Substances, and Universal and Singular Attributes; the former existing per se, the latter in the former. Universals are predicable of singulars, but attributes, in their original state, are not predicable of substances; but by the mental act, we may so connect an attribute with a subject, as to render the former predicable of the latter, as a difference, property, or accident. When a predicate is thus formed from an attribute, it is called connotative, or, as Whately justly remarks, "attributive," and signifies primarily, the attribute, and secondarily, the subject of inhesion. Original universals or attributes, as "man," "whiteness,” are called "absolute;" but terms may be made to cross, so that by an act of mind, that which signifies substance may be conceived as an attribute, and as no longer predicable of the individuals; in this sense they are called "abstract," as "humanitas" from "homo;" but when they are primarily or secondarily predicable of individuals, they become “concrete," e. g. "man" is concrete and absolute; “white," concrete and connotative; "whiteness," abstract and absolute; it must be remembered only, that no abstract term is connotative. Vid. Occam, Log. p. i. ch. 5, 10. Simplicius enumerates eleven modes of predication, arising from the relations of genus and species. Aristotle, in the Physics, divides substance in eight modes, omitting "time"—considering subject as both composite and individual. The division into universals and particulars was probably taken from the categorical scheme of Pythagoras.
We annex a scheme of the relation of subject to predicate, in respect of consistency and inhesion.

 Genera, species, and differences, differ according to their predicaments, hence in each predicament, there are genera, species, and differences. Those genera also, have a mutual arrangement, one of which is under the other, as "flying" under "animal," but those are not mutually arranged, one of which, is not ranked under the other, as "animal" and "science." Upon the application of this general rule, see Whately and Hill's Logic, especially the latter, in respect to summa and subaltern genera, and their cognates, pages 56, 57. Properly speaking, there can be only one highest genus, namely, Being; though relatively a subaltern term, may at any time, be assumed as the summum genus, as "substance," "animal," etc.
 Difference joined to genus constitutes species—it is called specific difference, when it constitutes the lowest species, as of individuals. Cf. Crakanthorpe Logica, lib. ii. The common definitions of the heads of the predicables, are those of Porphyry, adopted by subsequent logicians. Vide Porph. Isagoge.
 The principle of distinction above is shown to be grammatical, by Trendelenburg, Elementa, section 3rd. The six last may be reduced to Relation, see Hamilton on Reid, p. 688. The categories are enumerated and exemplified in the following verses, for the student's recollection.
Summa decem: Substantia, Quantum, Quale, Relatio,
Actio, Passio. Ubi, Quando, Situs, Habitus.
Presbyter exilis, specie pater, orat et ardet,
In campo, semper rectus, et in tunicâ.

 On the various modes in which Aristotle employs the term οὐσία, cf. Metaphy. lib. iv., and Phys. lib. iii. Without entering into the dispute relative to the real existence of genera and species, as substances independent of us, between the old Realists and the modern Conceptualists, it will be sufficient to state that Aristotle here employs the term as the summum genus, under which, by continued abstraction of differences, all things may be comprehended as a common universal. Thus also Plato in Repub. lib. vii. Whether called Entity, Being, Substance, or Subsistence, it may be defined, "That which subsists independently of any other created thing," and in this view may be affirmatively predicated of every cognate term, though no cognate term can be so predicated of it: thus all bodies, all animals, all lions, etc., are substances or things, according as we adopt either of these last as summum genus. Archytas places essence first; Plotinus and Nicostratus doubt its generic affinity altogether; but all regard the principle laid down, of some one, independent, existence, or conception.
 But in getting to this ultimate abstraction, the first common nature of which the mind forms conception from individual comparison, is called the lowest primary or most specific species, and of this, every cognate term may be universally predicated, though itself cannot be predicated of any cognate term. Between these extremes, all intermediate notions (and their verbal signs) are called subaltern, each of which, like the step of a ladder, is at once superior to some and inferior to others, and becomes a genus in relation to some lower species, and a species to some higher genera. The annexed "Arbor Porphyriana" is given by Aquinas, Opusc. 48. Tract. 2, cap. 3. In all the earlier specimens, "animal rationale" is placed between "Animal" and "Homo," as the proximum genus, divided into "mortale" and "immortale," in accordance with Porphyry's definition of man. We shall here observe also, that a summum genus can have no constitutive differences, which are represented at the side, though a summum genus may have properties.
 For the method of predication, vide Huyshe, Aldrich, or Whately. Also compare the Topics iv. 2, Isagoge 2, Aquinas Opusc. 48, cap. 2. Genus and species are said "prædicari in quid," i. e. are expressed by a substantive; Property and Accident "in quale," or by an adjective. This whole chapter, brings forcibly to the mind, Butler's satirical burlesque of Hudibrastic acumen, in discovering
"Where entity and quiddity,
The ghosts of defunct bodies fly!"

Hudibras, Part i. Can. 1.

Though very necessary, the initiative processes of Logic, indeed present

"A kind of Babylonish dialect,
Which learned pedants much affect."

 Plato, in the Philebus, observes, that a philosopher ought not to descend, below wholes, and common natures.
 Vide supra, note; also Metaph. lib. iv. and vi.
 Archytas adopts a different division of substance, into matter, form, and a composite of the two, and this division Aristotle shows in his Physics, and Metaphysics, and Physical Auscultation he knew, but does not employ it in this treatise, as not adopted for its subject matter, namely, logical discussion. Cf. Physica Ausc. lib. iii., and Metaph. lib. vi. and xi.
 Simplicius observes that Aristotle discusses the things which substance has in common with the other predicaments; Iamblichus, what is common to it, and also its property and difference. Some may doubt how essence, will not be in a subject, as ideas according to Plato are in intellect, yet these are neither as in a subject, but are as essence in another essence: Aristotle discusses this in the 12th book of the Metaphysics.
 Generic difference, it must be remembered, constitutes subaltern species―specific difference, forms the lowest species―the former difference is predicated of things different in species, the latter of things differing in number. In the scholastic theory, the properties of the summum genus were regarded as flowing from the simple substance, those of all subordinate classes, from the differentia. See Hill's Logic on the Predicables.
 It was the opinion of Kant, as well as of Reid and Stewart, that in mind, as in body, substance and unity are not presented but represented, but what the thing itself is, which is the subject and owner of the several qualities, yet not identical with any one of them, can only be conceived, in as far as we can attain to any single conception of the τὸ ὄν—through its many modifications, which attainment is itself questionable. Vide some admirable remarks in Mansel's Prolego. Log. 277. Generally it suffices to retain the quaint form of the schools noticed above upon predication of genus and species. Vide Aldrich's Logic. Genus is a whole logically, but species metaphysically, or, as they may be better expressed, the first is Totum Universale, the second Totum Essentiale. Cf. Crakanthorpe Logica, lib. ii, cap. 5. Since writing the above, the striking illustration occurs to me, used by Lord Shaftesbury, of "the person left within, who has power to dispute the appearances, and redress, the imagination." Shaftesbury's Charac. vol. i. p. 325. The passage has more sense than, yet as much sound as, any of his Lordship's writing.
 This, says Simplicius, is doubted by some, and indeed in his Physics, lib. i., Aristotle apparently contradicts his own statement above by instancing Form as the contrary to Privation, both being substantial; but Form is but partly, substance, and partly, habit, and only so much as it is the latter, is it contrary to Privation, not "quoad substantiam."
 This is true, discrete quantities being unchangeable, and definite in quantity.
 He does not mean that contraries exist in substance at one and the same time, as may be perceived from the examples he adduces. Archytas, according to Simplicius, admits the capability of contraries to be the peculiarity of substance; "thus vigilance is contrary to sleep, slowness to swiftness, disease to health, of all which, one and the same man, is capable." Simp. in Arist. Cat. Compare also Waitz, Organ. p. 291, Comment.
 Simplicius alleges that certain Peripatetics asserted that matter itself was susceptible of πάθος. It must be remembered however that Aristotle's reading of πάθη (Rhet. lib. i.) is, that they are certain things added to substance, beyond its own nature. Vide Scholia ad Categorias, ed. Waitz, p. 32. Leip. 1844.
 The union between οὐσία and ὕλη is laid down in the treatise de Animâ, lib. ii. 1, sec. 2: the latter term was used by the schoolmen to signify the subject matter upon which any art was employed, in which sense, it was tantamount to primal substance.
 Some say that quantity, is considered in juxta-position with substance, because it subsists together with it, for after substance is admitted, it is necessary to inquire whether it is one or many; others, because among other motions, that which is according to quantity, viz. increase and diminution, is nearer to the notion of substance, viz. generation and corruption, than "alliation" is, which is a motion according to quality. Taylor. Vide ch. 8, and Sulpicius, concerning the nature of this last. See also, Arist. Phys. lib. iii. et v., also cf. Cat. ch. 14.
 Conf. Metaphy. lib. iv. cap. 13, Ποσὸν λέγεται τὸ διαιρετὸν εἰς ἐνυπάρχοντα, κ. τ. λ. The reader will do well to compare the above chapter, throughout, with that quoted from the Metaphysics, where these terms are all used equivocally.
 Aristotle means by λόγος, a sentence subsisting in voice, not in intellect. Sulpic. He adds also, that Archytas, Athenodorus, and Ptolemy condemn the division of quantity into two kinds, and prefer that of number, magnitude, and momentum, but the reply is, that the last is a quality, the same as density.
 Plotinus, in his first book on the Genera of Being, says, if the continued, is quantity, discrete, cannot be; but he questions it as existing in the intellect, and confounds the distinction between order, in discrete, and position, in continued quantities. The point is touched upon also in lib. vi. of the Physics. Compare also ch. 12, on Priority, in the Categories, as to the relation in respect of number and time.
 Ιδιον τοῦ ποσοῦ ἀπέδωκαν τινες τὸ μηδὲν ἔχειν ἐναντίον, πρὸς ἀνατροπὴν δὲ τούτου οὐ χωρεῖ, διὰ τὸ προσεχῶς διδάξαι, ὅτι οὐδὲ τῇ οὐσίᾳ ἐστιν ἐναντιον.—Magent. Schol. ed. Waitz. Cf. Metaph. lib. ix. c. 4, 5, 6, and 7.
 The "upward" and "downward" do not signify place, but the predicament where, just as "yesterday" and "to-day" do not signify time, but the predicament when. Simplicius. Andronicus also assents to this. Compare the 4th book of Arist. Physics, where he defines place to be the boundary of that which it contains; the Pythagoreans, who in words agree with Aristotle, in effect differ most widely from him. Phys. lib. vi. and viii.
 This may be shown thus: Quantity, quoad se, is measurable; but the measurable can be measured by the same, or by more or by fewer measures; in the first case therefore, equality, in the second, inequality, subsists. Archytas divides the equal and unequal triply, according to the three differences of quantity. Taylor.
 Compare the divisions of relation given in the Metaphys. lib. iv. c. 15.
 This must not be confounded with the action of habit alluded to in b. ii. c. 2, of the Ethics. Plotinus doubts whether habit in things related be other than a mere name. This chapter is a thorough specimen of Aristotelian prolixity, of which, by a slight change in the Horatian line, we may say,—
"Et facundia deseret hunc et lucidus ordo." Ars Poet. 41.

 These are relatives, according to their genus, which is habit in this case. It may, however, be inquired how Aristotle afterwards ranks science, virtue, and their opposites, amongst qualities? Because the same thing, as he shows throughout, according to its connexion with different relations, occupies often a different predicament. Hence, also, contrariety is only partly inherent in relatives, since they derive their contrariety from the contrariety of their predicaments: thus in habit or in quality they receive contrariety, but not in the double or triple, because quantity does not receive it. To admit contraries therefore, is not the peculiarity of relatives, since contrariety is not in all relatives, nor in them alone,
 Conf. Top. i. 5, 1, also Anal. Post, ii. 7, 2. Definable objects are of two classes, producing a corresponding variety in the form of definition. 1st, Attributes, which include things belonging to every other category but that of substance. 2nd, Substances, which not existing in a subject, but per se, must be assumed before their attributes or relatives can be demonstrated. The definition of an attribute is to be found in its cause.
 See Blair's Lectures on Rhetoric, under Figurative Language.
 This is self-evident, as also that there are some few things in which science is the same as its object, e. g. things without matter are certainly present at the same time as the intellectual science which abides in energy. On the contrary, in the other case, as Simplicius observes, if indolence reject the knowledge of things, yet the things themselves remain, as music, etc. Vide also Brewer's Introduction to the Ethics, book v., as to the position occupied by ἐπιστήμη in the scheme of the five habits. It will thence appear second, and correspond to deduction from certain principles, the latter being a subdivision of abstract truth, thus:

 Aristotle selects this instance, as the quadrature of the circle does not appear from this, to have been known in his time, but Iamblichus asserts that it was known to the Pythagoreans, and Sextus Pythagoricus received it by succession. Archimedes is stated to have discovered the quadrature of the circle by a line called the line of Nicomedes: he himself styled it the quadratrix.
 Plato's favourite method of definition, which however was rejected by Speusippus, was to take a wide genus, and by the addition of successive differentiæ, to attive at a complex notion, co-extensive with the desired definition. Aristotle, on the other hand, to discover definition, employed the inductive method, (he does not name this however,) which consisted in examining the several individuals, of which the term to be defined is predicable and observing what they had in common. This will apply to relatives and co-relatives equally, and hence we perceive that, properly speaking, all definition is an inquiry into attributes. Every substance definable must be a species, every attribute a property. Vide Scholia, Edinburgh Review, No. cxv. p. 236. Pacius on Anal. Post, 11, 13, 21.
 Cf. Metaph. lib. iv. c. 15.
 Ποιότης. Def. "That which imparts what is apparent in matter, and what is the object of sense." Taylor's Explanation of Aristotelian Terms. See also Metaphys. lib. iv. c. 14, 19, and 20, Leip. The distinction in the text has been remarked upon, as exemplifying Aristotle's passion for definition, but it would be more correct to remember that it was perhaps less his inclination than his judgment, which induced him to lay down strict notions of verbal definition primarily, knowing that the thing signified, or idea, could never hold its proper position in the mind, if any doubt existed as to the meaning of the term of verbal symbol of it, ab origine. It is a great pity that modern controversialists so frequently neglect this.
 Cf. Ethics, book ii. ch. 5, and book ii. ch. 1. In the latter place, Aristotle shows that moral virtues arise from habit, in opposition to Plato, who taught that the virtues were not produced by learning or nature, but were divinely bestowed. Aristotle's opinion resembled Locke's in the denial of innate ideas, the soul having nothing within it but inclination, τὸ πεφυκὸς. The student will profitably refer here to Bishop Butler's Analogy, on the growth of mental habits. Anal. part i. ch. 5. Bohn's Stand. Lib.
 So Cicero, de Off. lib. iii., connects these two, "temperantia est scientia." See also Montaigne's Essays, ch. xl. b. i., and ch. ii. b. iiii.
 The Ἦθος signifies the habitual disposition of "humour," as in Every Man out of his Humour, by Ben Jonson.
"When some one peculiar quality
Doth so possess a man, that it doth draw
All his affects, his spirits, and his powers,
In their confluctions, all to run one way—
This may be truly said to be a humour."

Vide Aristotle's Rhetoric, (Bohn's Class. Lib.). And again, Coriolanus, act iii. scene 2,

—Away, my disposition, and possess me
Some harlot's spirit!

Or, act ii. sc. 1, "Men: His nature, is too noble for the world," etc.

 Simplicius doubts whether the same thing is signified by quale, and quality: probably the latter signifies the peculiarity itself, but quale that which participates in the peculiarity, as in the examples given above. As to the term "quality," Plato in his Theætetus insinuates that he was the author of it, and indeed some ancient philosophers, as Antisthenes, subverted certain qualities, and allowed only the subsistience of qualia, which they deemed incorporeal. The Stoics, on the contrary, thought the qualities of incorporeal natures incorporeal, and of bodies, corporeal. Simplicius defines qualities—"powers, active, yet not so, primarily, nor alone."
 It may perhaps seem strange that Aristotle distinguishes passions and passive qualities by the same characteristics as he has before used about habit and disposition; but it may be replied, that here he considers the passions and passive qualities which by nature are easily or hardly removed. Heat, so far as it disposes a subject, is a disposition; so far as that disposition is permanent, is a habit; if it be superficially effected by an agent, it is called a passion, and so far as the passion is produced permanently and intrinsically, it is called passive quality. Taylor.
 Cf. Ethics, b. ii. ch. 5; also Metaphys. lib. iv. ch. 21; where the same examples of inaminate objects are given.
 Ethics, book ix. ch. 8. The being loved is like something passive.
 Vide supra, Cat. i. Massinger's employment of the very ord, we are now discussing, presents a peculiar difficulty in establishing the paronymous or denominative relation. In the Roman Actor, act i. scene 3, and also in the Picture, act ii. scene 1, the word quality is limited to actors and their profession. See Gifford's notes on Massinger. In fact, most of our ancient dramatists confined the word chiefly to histrionic performers.
 The name "conjugata" is more properly applied to derivatives from the same primitive, as sapiens, sapienter, sapienta; the σύστοιχα of Aristotle. Cf Topics ii. 9, 1. Cic. Top. c. iii.
 See below, Cat. xi. 5.
 Repugnance is not synonymous with contrariety, e. g. red and blue are repugnant, but not poosed. Archytas says, "Certain contraries are conjoined to quality, as if it received a certain contrariety and privation."
 Here he evidently means qualities by qualia, as the examples indicate. There were four opinions entertained, upon the admission by qualia, of degree. Plotinus, and the Platonists, asserted that all qualia, and qualities alike, received the greater and the less; others, limited intension, and remission, tot he participants; the Stoics avowed that the virtues are incapable of either; and the fourth opinion, which Porphyry opposes, allows degree, to material, but denies it, to immaterial, and self-subsistent, qualities. Vde Simp. in Catego. Iamb. Opera. Aristotle, below, seems to refer to the second, of these opinions.
 If impression and character produce similitude, and quality consists in character, it will justly have its peculiarity according to the similar and dissimilar. Archytas observes, "The peculiarity of quality is the similar and the dissimilar; for we say that all those things are similar in color which have the same color, and the same idea of character; but those are dissimilar which subsist in a contrary manner."
 ταῖς καθ' ἕκαστα, etc. It may be useful here to give a general definition of the several meanings applied by Aristotle to peculiar uses of the preposition as regards relative action and relation. Δί' ὸ, on account of which, then signifies—the final cause; δί' ὸυ through which—the instrumental cause; ἕξ ὸῦ or ἕν φ, from or in which—the material cause; καθ' ὸ—according to which—form is thus denominated; πρὸς ὅ, with relation to which—or the paradeigmatic cause; and υφ' ὸυ, by which—the demiurgic or fabricative cause. Cf. Top. lib. iv. c. 15, et seq. Taylor makes one continual mistake in the translation of καθ' ἕκαστα, by rendering it "particular", whereas the latter is "ἐν μερει." Buhle, on the contrary, is correct in this translation throughout.
 Aristotle here refers the reader to the category of relation, but as regards the opinion entertained of the remaining categories, Porphyry and Iamblichus consider them as accessorial relatives; e. g. "When" and "where" are not, per se, place and time, but when these two latter exist primarily, the former accede to them. Thus also "having" signifies something distinct from the existing thing, at the same time that it exists with it. Upon the reduction of the latter six categories to relation, see Hamilton on Reid, p. 688; also St. Hilaire's Translation, Preface, p. 68, et seq.
 For a brief exposition of this chapter, the reader is referred to the nature and laws of logical opposition in necessary, impossible, and contingent matter, given in Aldrich, Huyshe, Whately, Hill, and Mansel. It will be remembered however that he here speaks of the opposition of terms, the rules for the opposition of propositions being more especially considered in the Interpretation: still a reference to that treatise, as well as to the authors cited above, will be useful, as elucidating the grounds on which all logical opposition is founded. Archytas (says Simplicius) does not omit, but seems to have more accurately explained the differences of contraries adduced by Aristotle. He says: Of contraries, some are in the genera of genera, as good and evil, the first being the genus of the virtues, the second of the vices: some again in the genera of species, as virtue to vice, the first being the genus of prudence, temperance, etc.; the other of imprudence, intemperance: lastly, some in species, as fortitude to timidity, etc.: but he adds, "there is nothing to prevent the contraries of genera being reduced under one genus, as good and evil under quality."
 Vide Whately, book ii. ch. 5, sect. 1; also book ii. ch. 3, sect. 4; also Metaph. lib. iv. c. 10.
 Cf. Metaph. lib. iv. c. 22 and 23. Examples of Positive, Privative," and Negative words are given in Hill's logic, p. 27. Aldritch's definition of the three will be remembered here, namely, that the first signifies the presence of an attribute; the second, its absence from a subject capable of it; the last, its absence from a subject incapable of it. A definite noun and its corresponding indefinite noun together, constitute a perfect division.
 This opposition between propositions is said to be as to their quality; to this may be appended that contrariety of quality which exists between two particulars, properly called the opposition of sub-contraries. It may here be observed, that though this last-named form of contrariety is admitted by Aristotle (Int. ch. 7,) he does not use the term ὑπεναντιως as expressive of it, but calls in Anal. Prior, ii. 15, an opposition κατὰ τὴν λέξιν. The term is used by the Greek commentators, (Ammonius Schol. p. 115, a. 15,) Boethius Int. ad Syll. p. 564. A poetical example of the mutual subversion of some relative opposites may be found in Shakespeare's King John, act iii. scene I:
"Indirection thereby grows indirect,
And falsehood falsehood cures: as fire cools fire
Within the scorched veins of one new burn'd."

 Vide Whately and Hill's Logic, De terminoram ditributione: also the former upon Fallacies, book i. sections 1 and 13.
 Vide Ethics, book ii. ch. 1; also Magna Moralia, and Metaph. lib. viii. It will be observed that here, as elsewhere, he speaks of moral, not intellectual advancement: Truth, however, he considers the work of both the intellectual parts of the soul. Ethics, book vi. ch. 2. See Merchant of Venice, act iv. scene 1; and Massinger's beautiful lines on the progress of moral habit in the 5th act, 2nd scene, of the Virgin Martyr; also the duty of increasing the mental powers, Hamlet, act iv. sc. 4;
"Sure he that made us with such large discourse,
Looking before and after, gave us not
That capacity and godlike reason
To fast in us unused."

 Vide rules of natural opposition in the common Logical Treatises.
 These are properly contradictories, one being true and the other false, but the definition of contradictories does not include them as being given by Aldrich of only of universals; the definition however given in Anal. Post. i. 2, 6, will include them—ἀντίφασις δὲ ἀντίθεσις ἧς οὐκ ἔστι μεταξὺ καθ᾽ αὑτήν. Some logicians call the opposition of singulars secondary contradiction. Boethius, p. 613, regards such instances as contradictories; also Wallis, lib. ii. ch. 5. Compare Aldritch's Logic upon rules of contradiction: it is remarkable that he does not mention the opposition of singulars until he comes to the causes of opposition of propositions. Cf. Interpretation 7, Anal. Prior, xi. 15.
 Compare note in the preceding chapter relative to the observation of Archytas as to generic and specific contrariety, whence it will be seen that this chapter is nothing else than an elaborations of the principle he lays down. He adds in his treatise on Opposites, "There are three differences of contraries; for some things are opposed as good to evil, as for instance health to sickness, some as evil to evil, as avarice to prodigality, and some as neither to neither, as the white to the black, and the heavy to the light." What he calls "neither," and Aristotle "the negation of extremes," subsequent philosophers called "indifferent," ἀδιάφορα. Comp. Cic. ad Atticum, also Sanct. Chrys. in Ep. ad Ephes. c. 5.
 Logic taking no cognizance of understood matter, the necessary, impossible, and contingent should be omitted from the table of opposition.—Mansel. Compare also Whately de Oppositione, cited above.
 Cf. Metaph. lib. iv. c. 11.
 In the text, τοὺς ἐντιμωτέρους. The adverbial construction represented in Greek by the neuter plural, was frequently the form of employing πρῶτος in this sense: thus Herod. vi. 100, Αἰσχίνης ὁ Νόθωνος ἐὼν τῶν Ἐρετρίεων τὰ πρῶτα. In Latin the same expression occurs for great man, primates equivalent to optimates, and sometimes primores; thus Liv. Primorbius patrum; Hor. Populi primores, etc. An odd instance of "first" for "noblest" occurs in Coriolanus, act IV., scene 1,
"My first son,
Whither wilt thou go?" where see note, Knight's ed.

 The tautological baldness of this whole chapter, it is hopeless to remedy, its arrangement also is slovenly: for the latter portion, the next chapter will appear elucidatory, and, in fact, is the same statement of the whole, in reverse.
 Porphyry recognises only a relative difference between two given species. See Introduction; also Hill's Logic.
 See Whately, book ii. ch. 5.
 The office of Logic being to guard against ambiguity in the use of terms; it is clear that by nominal division alone, species from the same genus will often have a subordinate opposition, as antagonistic in its nature, as opposite genera; for example, purple, yellow, etc., under colour. Boethius uses division in three senses: 1. Of a genus into species. 2. Of a whole into its parts. 3. Of an equivocal term into its several significations. Cicero. Top. vi. ch., calls the first, divisio, the second partitio. Aristotle approves division by contraries. See Top. vi. 6, 3, de part. Anim. i. 3.
 Compare the Physics, books iii. v. vi. vii. viii., also Metaph. lib. x. chp. 9, 11, 12. In the 11th ch. of the 10th book, Meta., he defines motion, Ἕ κίνησις ἐνέργεια μὲν εἶναι δοκεῖ τις ἀτελὴς δὲ. Vide also the Scholia, Marc. Ed. Waitz, Ἡ κινησίς ἐστιν ἐξάλλαξις καὶ ἔκστασὶς.
 The following figure will illustrate this comparison: the use of γνώμον being the ascertainment of right angles.
 This form is often cognate, and almost identical with the 7th, of possession, thus St. Paul's Ep. 2 Cor iv. 7; as to the 2nd, the idiom of the English does not fully correspond with the Greek ἔχειν, our word in relation to quantity being "to hold." A rare use of the word "havings" occurs in the Lover's Complaint of Shakspeare; see Knight's edition: "Whose rarest havings made the blossoms dote."
 This is Shakspearian usage also. Sometimes this form is applied generally to condition or estate, and even attire, and manner. See Winter's Tale, iv. 3. The next are in the sense of "holding," again.
 More properly χωρεῖν. It is evident throughout this chapter, that the elliptical modes in which we employ "have" as auxiliary verb are endless, and in the use of it, the assimilation of the English to the Greek is peculiar. Sometimes a very decided verb is omitted, and the auxiliary made to stand alone; thus in K. Henry VIII. act ii. sc. 2,
——"All the clerks,
I mean the learned ones, in Christian kingdoms,
Have their free voices"——for "have sent" their free voices.

