---
heading: "Chapter 2b"
title: "The Aether Element"
# date: 2015-09-09
date: 2020-12-03
# 2020-01-04
weight: 202
image: /photos/city.jpg
description: "The aether is the substance of the abstract mind, as well as the ideas and feelings that are generated by that mind."
writer:
  name: Juan
  url: https://www.linkedin.com/in/jundalisay/
icon: "Superphysics"
---



The aether is the substance of the abstract mind, as well as the ideas and feelings that are generated by that mind. 
- In Taoism, this is the water element. 
- In Hinduism, the aether is the *akasha*.
- In Cartesian-Spinozan Physics, this is *Substance*.

The aether has the least Negative Force and most of the Positive.

This leads to the concept of *akashic* records which leads to the concept of *aethereal memory*. This is different from the physical electronic memory in hard drives, computer chips, and brains.

Human, animal, and plant minds are sentient because they can tap into this aethereal memory which is of the same substance as their aethereal minds. 

Their sentience therefore comes from the Positive than the Negative. Humans are more advanced that animals because we have even more of the Positive Force.

Computers only have access to electronic memory and so are incapable of sentience. Therefore, the path to artificial sentience is to give computers the ability to access aethereal memory. 

Aethereal memory is the mechanism behind chance and karma, manifesting as good or bad luck. If you enter bad data into a database, then you will necessarily query bad data later. 

It would certainly be useful to know when your good or bad luck (resulting from your good or bad actons recorded by the aether) is scheduled to arrive (in spacetime or the Spatial Layer) so you can prepare for it. 

In this way, you won't be tossed around by chance and so have more manageable experiences in Existence.  

<!-- An aethereal mind can refer to either a physical mind or a non-physical one. 
- a physical mind resides in the brain.
- a non-physical mind is called a soul. It is above, or not bound by, the lower layers.  -->

Aethereal memory is processed by the aethereal mind just as electronic memory is processed by an electronic brain or circuit.  

The multiverse is itself is one huge aethereal mind, which the Hindus call **Brahma**. 
- In our matrix analogy, this mind can be seen as the RAM of a computer that generates its own virtual reality.

Each virtual reality in the Matrix is its own universe. Thus, our universe is just one of many. 

Unlike Science and New Age philosophy that puts emphasis on consciousness as to put all existential mysteries in it, Superphysics puts all the mysteries in the aethereal mind. 

This is because consciousness is just 'on' or 'off' just as existence either "exists" or "doesn't exist".  

Subscience | Name | Use of the Aetheral Layer
--- | --- | ---
Material Superhysics | Aethereal Layer | As the basis of the Law of Conservation of Identity
Bio Superphysics | Aethereal Element | As the dynamics of the soul
Spiritual Superphysics | Aethereal Stratum | As the dynamics of the Crown, 3rd Eye, and Throat Chakras


<!-- The nature of this Mind then forms the subdivisions of Superphysics:

1. Material Superphysics - this studies the nature of the Mind of the physical universe
2. Bio Superphysics - this studies the nature of the Mind of a living being
3. Social Superphysics - this studies the nature of the Mind of society
4. Spiritual Superphysics - this studies the techniques to reach the Supreme or pure Positivity -->


