---
heading: Day 1b
title: "Ropes"
# date: 2025-05-15
weight: 36
description: ""
a: "Galileo"
c: "darkgoldenrod"
---



{{< l a="Salviati" >}}
The first question is, How are fibres, each not more than two or three cubits in length, so tightly bound together in the case of a rope one hundred cubits long that great force [violenza] is required to break it?

Can you not hold a hempen fibre so tightly between your fingers that I, pulling by the other end, would break it before drawing it away from you?

Certainly you can.  And now when the fibres of hemp are held not only at the ends, but are grasped by the surrounding medium throughout their entire length is it not manifestly more difficult to tear them loose from what holds them than to break them? 

But in the case of the rope the very act of twisting causes the threads to bind one another in such a way that when the rope is stretched with a great force the fibres break rather than separate from each other. 

At the point where a rope parts the fibres are, as everyone knows, very short, nothing like a cubit long, as they would be if the parting of the rope occurred, not by the breaking of the filaments, but by their slipping one over the other. 
{{< /l >}}


SAGR.   In confirmation of this it may be remarked that ropes sometimes break not by a lengthwise pull but by excessive twisting.  This, it seems to me, is a conclusive argument because the threads bind one another so tightly that the compressing fibres do not permit those which are compressed to lengthen the spirals even that little bit by which it is necessary for them to lengthen in order to surround the rope which, on twisting, grows shorter and thicker. 


{{< l a="Salviati" >}}
You are quite right.  Now see how one fact suggests (9) another.  The thread held between the fingers does not yield [57] to one who wishes to draw it away even when pulled with considerable force, but resists because it is held back by a double compression, seeing that the upper finger presses against the lower as hard as the lower against the upper.  Now, if we could retain only one of these pressures there is no doubt that only half the original resistance would remain; but since we are not able, by lifting, say, the upper finger, to remove one of these pressures without also removing the other, it becomes necessary to preserve one of them by means of a new device which causes the thread to press itself against the finger or against some other solid body upon which it rests; and thus it is brought about that the very force which pulls it in order to snatch it away compresses it more and more as the pull increases.  This is accomplished by wrapping the thread around the solid in the manner of a spiral; and will be better understood by means of a figure.  Let AB and CD be two cylinders between which is stretched the thread EF: and for the sake of greater clearness we will imagine it to be a small cord.  If these two cylinders be pressed strongly together, the cord EF, when drawn by the end F, will undoubtedly stand a considerable pull before it slips between the two compressing solids.  But if we remove one of these cylinders the cord, though remaining in contact with the other, will not thereby be prevented from slipping freely.  On the other hand, if one holds the cord loosely against the top of the cylinder A, winds it in the spiral form AFLOTR, and then pulls it by the end R, it is evident that the cord will begin to bind the cylinder; the greater the number of spirals the more tightly will the cord be pressed against the cylinder by any given pull.  Thus as the number of turns increases, the line of Fig 2 (10) contact becomes longer and in consequence more resistant; so that the cord slips and yields to the tractive force with increasing difficulty.  [58]

Is it not clear that this is precisely the kind of resistance which one meets in the case of a thick hemp rope where the fibres form thousands and thousands of similar spirals? And, indeed, the binding effect of these turns is so great that a few short rushes woven together into a few interlacing spirals form one of the strongest of ropes which I believe they call pack rope [susta]. 
{{< /l >}}


SAGR.   What you say has cleared up two points which I did not previously understand.  One fact is how two, or at most three, turns of a rope around the axle of a windlass cannot only hold it fast, but can also prevent it from slipping when pulled by the immense force of the weight [forza del peso] which it sustains; and moreover how, by turning the windlass, this same axle, by mere friction of the rope around it, can wind up and lift huge stones while a mere boy is able to handle the slack of the rope.  The other fact has to do with a simple but clever device, invented by a young kinsman of mine, for the purpose of descending from a window by means of a rope without lacerating the palms of his hands, as had happened to him shortly before and greatly to his discomfort.  A small sketch will make this clear.  He took a wooden cylinder, AB, about as thick as a walking stick and about one span long: on this he cut a spiral channel of about one turn and a half, and large enough to just receive the rope which he wished to use.  Having introduced the rope at the end A and led it out again at the end B, he enclosed both the cylinder and the rope in a case of wood or tin, hinged along the side so that it could be easily opened and closed.  After he had fastened the rope to a firm support above, he could, on grasping and squeezing the case with both hands, hang by his arms.  The pressure on the rope, lying between the case and the cylinder, was such that he could, at will, either grasp the case Fig 3 (11) more tightly and hold himself from slipping, or slacken his hold and descend as slowly as he wished.  [59]


{{< l a="Salviati" >}}
A truly ingenious device! I feel, however, that for a complete explanation other considerations might well enter; yet I must not now digress upon this particular topic since you are waiting to hear what I think about the breaking strength of other materials which, unlike ropes and most woods, do not show a filamentous structure.  The coherence of these bodies is, in my estimation, produced by other causes which may be grouped under two heads.  One is that much-talked-of repugnance which nature exhibits towards a vacuum; but this horror of a vacuum not being sufficient, it is necessary to introduce another cause in the form of a gluey or viscous substance which binds firmly together the component parts of the body. 

First I shall speak of the vacuum, demonstrating by definite experiment the quality and quantity of its force [virtù].  If you take two highly polished and smooth plates of marble, metal, or glass and place them face to face, one will slide over the other with the greatest ease, showing conclusively that there is nothing of a viscous nature between them.  But when you attempt to separate them and keep them at a constant distance apart, you find the plates exhibit such a repugnance to separation that the upper one will carry the lower one with it and keep it lifted indefinitely, even when the latter is big and heavy. 

This experiment shows the aversion of nature for empty space, even during the brief moment required for the outside air to rush in and fill up the region between the two plates.  It is also observed that if two plates are not thoroughly polished, their contact is imperfect so that when you attempt to separate them slowly the only resistance offered is that of weight; if, however, the pull be sudden, then the lower plate rises, but quickly falls back, having followed the upper plate only for that very short interval of time required for the expansion of the small amount of air remaining between the plates, in consequence of their not fitting, and for the entrance of the surrounding air.  This resistance which is exhibited between the two (12) plates is doubtless likewise present between the parts of a solid, and enters, at least in part, as a concomitant cause of their coherence.  [60]
{{< //l >}}


SAGR.   Allow me to interrupt you for a moment, please; for I want to speak of something which just occurs to me, namely, when I see how the lower plate follows the upper one and how rapidly it is lifted, I feel sure that, contrary to the opinion of many philosophers, including perhaps even Aristotle himself, motion in a vacuum is not instantaneous.  If this were so the two plates mentioned above would separate without any resistance whatever, seeing that the same instant of time would suffice for their separation and for the surrounding medium to rush in and fill the vacuum between them.  The fact that the lower plate follows the upper one allows us to infer, not only that motion in a vacuum is not instantaneous, but also that, between the two plates, a vacuum really exists, at least for a very short time, sufficient to allow the surrounding medium to rush in and fill the vacuum; for if there were no vacuum there would be no need of any motion in the medium.  One must admit then that a vacuum is sometimes produced by violent motion [violenza] or contrary to the laws of nature, (although in my opinion nothing occurs contrary to nature except the impossible, and that never occurs). 

But here another difficulty arises.  While experiment convinces me of the correctness of this conclusion, my mind is not entirely satisfied as to the cause to which this effect is to be attributed.  For the separation of the plates precedes the formation of the vacuum which is produced as a consequence of this separation; and since it appears to me that, in the order of nature, the cause must precede the effect, even though it appears to follow in point of time, and since every positive effect must have a positive cause, I do not see how the adhesion of two plates and their resistance to separation -- actual facts -- can be referred to a vacuum as cause when this vacuum is yet to follow.  According to the infallible maxim of the Philosopher, the non-existent can produce no effect.  (13)

SIMP.   Seeing that you accept this axiom of Aristotle, I hardly think you will reject another excellent and reliable maxim of his, namely, Nature undertakes only that which happens without resistance; and in this saying, it appears to me, you will find the solution of your difficulty.  Since nature abhors a vacuum, she prevents that from which a vacuum would follow as a necessary consequence.  Thus it happens that nature prevents the separation of the two plates.  [61]

SAGR.   Now admitting that what Simplicio says is an adequate solution of my difficulty, it seems to me, if I may be allowed to resume my former argument, that this very resistance to a vacuum ought to be sufficient to hold together the parts either of stone or of metal or the parts of any other solid which is knit together more strongly and which is more resistant to separation.  If for one effect there be only one cause, or if, more being assigned, they can be reduced to one, then why is not this vacuum which really exists a sufficient cause for all kinds of resistance?



SALV.   I do not wish just now to enter this discussion as to whether the vacuum alone is sufficient to hold together the separate parts of a solid body; but I assure you that the vacuum which acts as a sufficient cause in the case of the two plates is not alone sufficient to bind together the parts of a solid cylinder of marble or metal which, when pulled violently, separates and divides.  And now if I find a method of distinguishing this well known resistance, depending upon the vacuum, from every other kind which might increase the coherence, and if I show you that the aforesaid resistance alone is not nearly sufficient for such an effect, will you not grant that we are bound to introduce another cause? Help him, Simplicio, since he does not know what reply to make. 

SIMP.   Surely, Sagredo's hesitation must be owing to another reason, for there can be no doubt concerning a conclusion which is at once so clear and logical. 

SAGR.   You have guessed rightly, Simplicio.  I was wondering whether, if a million of gold each year from Spain were not sufficient to pay the army, it might not be necessary to (14) make provision other than small coin for the pay of the soldiers. *

But go ahead, Salviati; assume that I admit your conclusion and show us your method of separating the action of the vacuum from other causes; and by measuring it show us how it is not sufficient to produce the effect in question. 

SALV.   Your good angel assist you.  I will tell you how to separate the force of the vacuum from the others, and afterwards how to measure it.  For this purpose let us consider a continuous substance whose parts lack all resistance to separation except that derived from a vacuum, such as is the case with water, a fact fully demonstrated by our Academician in one of his treatises.  Whenever a cylinder of water is subjected to a pull and [62] offers a resistance to the separation of its parts this can be attributed to no other cause than the resistance of the vacuum.  In order to try such an experiment I have invented a device which I can better explain by means of a sketch than by mere words.  Let CABD represent the cross section of a cylinder either of metal or, preferably, of glass, hollow inside and accurately turned.  Into this is introduced a perfectly fitting cylinder of wood, represented in cross section by EGHF, and capable of up-and-down motion.  Through the middle of this cylinder is bored a hole to receive an iron wire, carrying a hook at the end K, while the upper end of the wire, I, is provided with a conical head.  The wooden cylinder is countersunk at the top so as to receive, with a perfect fit, the conical head I of the wire, IK, when pulled down by the end K. 
Fig 4

Now insert the wooden cylinder EH in the hollow cylinder AD, so as not to touch the upper end of the latter but to leave free a space of two or three finger-breadths; this space is to be filled (15) with water by holding the vessel with the mouth CD upwards, pushing down on the stopper EH, and at the same time keeping the conical head of the wire, I, away from the hollow portion of the wooden cylinder.  The air is thus allowed to escape alongside the iron wire (which does not make a close fit) as soon as one presses down on the wooden stopper.  The air having been allowed to escape and the iron wire having been drawn back so that it fits snugly against the conical depression in the wood, invert the vessel, bringing it mouth downwards, and hang on the hook K a vessel which can be filled with sand or any heavy material in quantity sufficient to finally separate the upper surface of the stopper, EF, from the lower surface of the water to which it was attached only by the resistance of the vacuum.  Next weigh the stopper and wire together with the attached vessel and its contents; we shall then have the force of the vacuum [forza del vacuo].  If one attaches to a cylinder of marble [63] or glass a weight which, together with the weight of the marble or glass itself, is just equal to the sum of the weights before mentioned, and if breaking occurs we shall then be justified in saying that the vacuum alone holds the parts of the marble and glass together; but if this weight does not suffice and if breaking occurs only after adding, say, four times this weight, we shall then be compelled to say that the vacuum furnishes only one fifth of the total resistance [resistenza]. 

SIMP.   No one can doubt the cleverness of the device; yet it presents many difficulties which make me doubt its reliability.  For who will assure us that the air does not creep in between the glass and stopper even if it is well packed with tow or other yielding material? I question also whether oiling with wax or turpentine will suffice to make the cone, I, fit snugly on its seat.  Besides, may not the parts of the water expand and dilate? Why may not the air or exhalations or some other more subtile substances penetrate the pores of the wood, or even of the glass itself?

SALV.   With great skill indeed has Simplicio laid before us the difficulties; and he has even partly suggested how to prevent the (16) air from penetrating the wood or passing between the wood and the glass.  But now let me point out that, as our experience increases, we shall learn whether or not these alleged difficulties really exist.  For if, as is the case with air, water is by nature expansible, although only under severe treatment, we shall see the stopper descend; and if we put a small excavation in the upper part of the glass vessel, such as indicated by V, then the air or any other tenuous and gaseous substance, which might penetrate the pores of glass or wood, would pass through the water and collect in this receptacle V.  But if these things do not happen we may rest assured that our experiment has been performed with proper caution; and we shall discover that water does not dilate and that glass does not allow any material, however tenuous, to penetrate it. 

SAGR.   Thanks to this discussion, I have learned the cause of a certain effect which I have long wondered at and despaired of understanding.  I once saw a cistern which had been provided with a pump under the mistaken impression that the water might thus be drawn with less effort or in greater quantity than by means of the ordinary bucket.  The stock of the pump carried [64] its sucker and valve in the upper part so that the water was lifted by attraction and not by a push as is the case with pumps in which the sucker is placed lower down.  This pump worked perfectly so long as the water in the cistern stood above a certain level; but below this level the pump failed to work.  When I first noticed this phenomenon I thought the machine was out of order; but the workman whom I called in to repair it told me the defect was not in the pump but in the water which had fallen too low to be raised through such a height; and he added that it was not possible, either by a pump or by any other machine working on the principle of attraction, to lift water a hair's breadth above eighteen cubits; whether the pump be large or small this is the extreme limit of the lift.  Up to this time I had been so thoughtless that, although I knew a rope, or rod of wood, or of iron, if sufficiently long, would break by its own weight when held by the upper end, it never occurred to me (17) that the same thing would happen, only much more easily, to a column of water.  And really is not that thing which is attracted in the pump a column of water attached at the upper end and stretched more and more until finally a point is reached where it breaks, like a rope, on account of its excessive weight?

SALV.   That is precisely the way it works; this fixed elevation of eighteen cubits is true for any quantity of water whatever, be the pump large or small or even as fine as a straw.  We may therefore say that, on weighing the water contained in a tube eighteen cubits long, no matter what the diameter, we shall obtain the value of the resistance of the vacuum in a cylinder of any solid material having a bore of this same diameter.  And having gone so far, let us see how easy it is to find to what length cylinders of metal, stone, wood, glass, etc. , of any diameter can be elongated without breaking by their own weight.  [65]

Take for instance a copper wire of any length and thickness; fix the upper end and to the other end attach a greater and greater load until finally the wire breaks; let the maximum load be, say, fifty pounds.  Then it is clear that if fifty pounds of copper, in addition to the weight of the wire itself which may be, say, 1/8 ounce, is drawn out into wire of this same size we shall have the greatest length of this kind of wire which can sustain its own weight.  Suppose the wire which breaks to be one cubit in length and 1/8 ounce in weight; then since it supports 50 lbs.  in addition to its own weight, i.  e. , 4800 eighths-of-an ounce, it follows that all copper wires, independent of size, can sustain themselves up to a length of 4801 cubits and no more.  Since then a copper rod can sustain its own weight up to a length of 4801 cubits it follows that that part of the breaking strength [resistenza] which depends upon the vacuum, comparing it with the remaining factors of resistance, is equal to the weight of a rod of water, eighteen cubits long and as thick as the copper rod.  If, for example, copper is nine times as heavy as water, the breaking strength [resistenza allo strapparsi] of any copper rod, in so far as it depends upon the vacuum, is equal to the weight of two cubits of this same rod.  By a similar method one can (18) find the maximum length of wire or rod of any material which will just sustain its own weight, and can at the same time discover the part which the vacuum plays in its breaking strength. 
