---
heading: Chapter 14
title: "Decomposition"
c: "firebrick"
description: ""
date: 2025-09-23
weight: 193
---


1. Faced by the increasing hostility of the environment and by the legislative,
administrative and judicial practice born of that hostility, entrepreneurs and
capitalists—in fact the whole stratum that accepts the bourgeois scheme of
life—will eventually cease to function. Their standard aims are rapidly
becoming unattainable, their efforts futile. The most glamorous of these
bourgeois aims, the foundation of an industrial dynasty, has in most countries
become unattainable already, and even more modest ones are so difficult to
attain that they may cease to be thought worth the struggle as the
permanence of these conditions is being increasingly realized.

Considering the role of bourgeois motivation in the explanation of the
economic history of the last two or three centuries, its smothering by the
unfavorable reactions of society or its weakening by disuse no doubt constitutes
a factor adequate to explain a flop in the capitalist process—should we ever
observe it as a permanent phenomenon—and one that is much more important
than any of those that are presented by the Theory of Vanishing Investment
Opportunity. It is hence interesting to observe that that motivation not only is
threatened by forces external to the bourgeois mind but that it also tends to die
out from internal causes. There is of course close interdependence between the
two. But we cannot get at the true diagnosis unless we try to disentangle them.

One of those “internal causes” we have already met with. I have dubbed it
Evaporation of the Substance of Property. We have seen that, normally, the
modern businessman, whether entrepreneur or mere managing administrator, is
of the executive type. From the logic of his position he acquires something of
the psychology of the salaried employee working in a bureaucratic organization.
Whether a stockholder or not, his will to fight and to hold on is not and cannot
be what it was with the man who knew ownership and its responsibilities in the
fullblooded sense of those words. His system of values and his conception of
duty undergo a profound change. Mere stockholders of course have ceased to
count at all—quite independently of the clipping of their share by a regulating
and taxing state. Thus the modern corporation, although the product of the
capitalist process, socializes the bourgeois mind; it relentlessly narrows the scope
of capitalist motivation; not only that, it will eventually kill its roots.1

<!-- 1 Many people will deny this. This is due to the fact that they derive their impression
from past history and from the slogans generated by past history during which the -->

2. Still more important however is another “internal cause,” viz., the
disintegration of the bourgeois family. The facts to which I am referring are
too well known to need explicit statement. To men and women in modern
capitalist societies, family life and parenthood mean less than they meant
before and hence are less powerful molders of behavior; the rebellious son
or daughter who professes contempt for “Victorian” standards is, however
incorrectly, expressing an undeniable truth. The weight of these facts is not
impaired by our inability to measure them statistically. The marriage rate
proves nothing because the term Marriage covers as many sociological
meanings as does the term Property, and the kind of alliance that used to be
formed by the marriage contract may completely die out without any change
in the legal construction or in the frequency of the contract. Nor is the
divorce rate more significant. It does not matter how many marriages are
dissolved by judicial decree—what matters is how many lack the content
essential to the old pattern. If in our statistical age readers insist on a
statistical measure, the proportion of marriages that produce no children or
only one child, though still inadequate to quantify the phenomenon I mean,
might come as near as we can hope to come to indicating its numerical
importance. The phenomenon by now extends, more or less, to all classes.
But it first appeared in the bourgeois (and intellectual) stratum and its
symptomatic as well as causal value for our purposes lies entirely there. It
is wholly attributable to the rationalization of everything in life, which we
have seen is one of the effects of capitalist evolution. In fact, it is but one
of the results of the spread of that rationalization to the sphere of private life.
All the other factors which are usually adduced in explanation can be readily
reduced to that one.

As soon as men and women learn the utilitarian lesson and refuse to take
for granted the traditional arrangements that their social environment makes
for them, as soon as they acquire the habit of weighing the individual
advantages and disadvantages of any prospective course of action—or, as we
might also put it, as soon as they introduce into their private life a sort of
inarticulate system of cost accounting—they cannot fail to become aware of
the heavy personal sacrifices that family ties and especially parenthood entail
under modern conditions and of the fact that at the same time, excepting the
cases of farmers and peasants, children cease to be economic assets. These
sacrifices do not consist only of the items that come within the reach of the
institutional change brought about by the big corporation had not yet asserted itself. Also
they may think of the scope which corporate business used to give for illegal satisfactions
of the capitalist motivation. But that would cut my way: the fact that personal gain
beyond salary and bonus cannot, in corporate business, be reaped by executives except
by illegal or semi-illegal practices shows precisely that the structural idea of the
corporation is averse to it.

measuring rod of money but comprise in addition an indefinite amount of loss
of comfort, of freedom from care, and opportunity to enjoy alternatives of
increasing attractiveness and variety—alternatives to be compared with joys
of parenthood that are being subjected to a critical analysis of increasing
severity. 

The implication of this is not weakened but strengthened by the fact
that the balance sheet is likely to be incomplete, perhaps even fundamentally
wrong. For the greatest of the assets, the contribution made by parenthood to
physical and moral health—to “normality” as we might express it—particularly
in the case of women, almost invariably escapes the rational searchlight of
modern individuals who, in private as in public life, tend to focus attention
on ascertainable details of immediate utilitarian relevance and to sneer at the
idea of hidden necessities of human nature or of the social organism. The point
I wish to convey is, I think, clear without further elaboration. It may be
summed up in the question that is so clearly in many potential parents’ minds:
“Why should we stunt our ambitions and impoverish our lives in order to be
insulted and looked down upon in our old age?”

While the capitalist process, by virtue of the psychic attitudes it creates,
progressively dims the values of family life and removes the conscientious
inhibitions that an old moral tradition would have put in the way toward a
different scheme of life, it at the same time implements the new tastes. As
regards childlessness, capitalist inventiveness produces contraceptive devices
of ever-increasing efficiency that overcome the resistance which the strongest
impulse of man would otherwise have put up. As regards the style of life,
capitalist evolution decreases the desirability of, and provides alternatives to,
the bourgeois family home. I have previously adverted to the Evaporation
of Industrial Property; I have now to advert to the Evaporation of
Consumers’ Property.

Until the later decades of the nineteenth century, the town house and the
country place were everywhere not only pleasant and convenient shells of
private life on the higher levels of income, but they were indispensable.
Not only hospitality on any scale and in any style, but even the comfort,
dignity, repose and refinement of the family depended upon its having an
adequate foyer of its own that was adequately staffed. The arrangements
summarized by the term Home were accordingly accepted as a matter of
course by the average man and woman of bourgeois standing, exactly as
they looked upon marriage and children—the “founding of a family”—as
a matter of course.

Now, on the one hand, the amenities of the bourgeois home are becoming
less obvious than are its burdens. To the critical eye of a critical age it is likely
to appear primarily as a source of trouble and expense which frequently fail
to justify themselves. This would be so even independently of modern taxation and wages and of the attitude of modern household personnel, all of which
are typical results of the capitalist process and of course greatly strengthen the
case against what in the near future will be almost universally recognized as
an outmoded and uneconomical way of life. In this respect as in others we are
living in a transitional stage. The average family of bourgeois standing tends
to reduce the difficulties of running the big house and the big country place
by substituting for it small and mechanized establishments plus a maximum
of outside service and outside life—hospitality in particular being increasingly
shifted to the restaurant or club.

On the other hand, the home of the old type is no longer an indispensable
requirement of comfortable and refined living in the bourgeois sphere. The
apartment house and the apartment hotel represent a rationalized type of
abode and another style of life which when fully developed will no doubt
meet the new situation and provide all the essentials of comfort and
refinement. To be sure, neither that style nor its shell are fully developed
anywhere as yet and they proffer cost advantage only if we count in the
trouble and annoyance incident to running a modern home. But other
advantages they proffer already—the facility of using to the full the variety
of modern enjoyments, of travel, of ready mobility, of shifting the load of
the current little things of existence to the powerful shoulders of highly
specialized organizations.

It is easy to see how this in turn bears, in the upper strata of capitalist
society, upon the problems of the child. Again there is interaction: the
passing of the spacious home—in which alone the rich life of a numerous
family can unfold 2 —and the increasing friction with which it functions
supply another motive for avoiding the cares of parenthood; but the decline
of philoprogenitivity in turn renders the spacious home less worth while.
I have said that the new style of bourgeois life does not as yet offer any
decisive cost advantage. But this refers only to the current or prime costs of
servicing the wants of private life. As to overhead, even the purely pecuniary
advantage is obvious already. And inasmuch as the outlay on the most
durable elements of home life—especially the house, the pictures, the
furniture—used to be financed mainly from previous earnings we may say
that the need for accumulation of “consumers’ capital” is drastically reduced
by that process. This does not mean of course that demand for “consumers’
capital” is at present, even relatively, smaller than it was; the increasing
demand for durable consumers’ goods from small and medium incomes
more than counter-balances this effect. But it does mean that, so far as the
hedonistic component in the pattern of acquisitive motives is concerned, the

<!-- 2 Modern relations between parents and children are of course partly conditioned by the
crumbling of that steady frame of family life. -->

desirability of incomes beyond a certain level is reduced. In order to satisfy
himself of this, the reader need only visualize the situation in a thoroughly
practical spirit: the successful man or couple or the “society” man or couple
who can pay for the best available accommodation in hotel, ship and train,
and for the best available qualities of the objects of personal consumption
and use—which qualities are increasingly being turned out by the conveyor
of mass production 3
—will, things being what they are, as a rule have all they
want with any intensity for themselves. And it is easy to see that a budget
framed on those lines will be far below the requirements of a “seignioral”
style of life.

3. In order to realize what all this means for the efficiency of the capitalist
engine of production we need only recall that the family and the family home
used to be the mainspring of the typically bourgeois kind of profit motive.
Economists have not always given due weight to this fact. When we look more
closely at their idea of the self-interest of entrepreneurs and capitalists we cannot
fail to discover that the results it was supposed to produce are really not at all
what one would expect from the rational self-interest of the detached individual
or the childless couple who no longer look at the world through the windows
of a family home. Consciously or unconsciously they analyzed the behavior of
the man whose views and motives are shaped by such a home and who means
to work and to save primarily for wife and children. As soon as these fade out
from the moral vision of the businessman, we have a different kind of homo
oeconomicus before us who cares for different things and acts in different ways.
For him and from the standpoint of his individualistic utilitarianism, the behavior
of that old type would in fact be completely irrational. He loses the only sort of
romance and heroism that is left in the unromantic and unheroic civilization of
capitalism—the heroism of navigare necesse est, vivere non necesse est.4 And
he loses the capitalist ethics that enjoins working for the future irrespective of
whether or not one is going to harvest the crop oneself.

The last point may be put more tellingly. In the preceding chapter it was
observed that the capitalist order entrusts the long-run interests of society to
the upper strata of the bourgeoisie. They are really entrusted to the family
motive operative in those strata. The bourgeoisie worked primarily in order
to invest, and it was not so much a standard of consumption as a standard
of accumulation that the bourgeoisie struggled for and tried to defend against
governments that took the short-run view. 5 With the decline of the driving
power supplied by the family motive, the businessman’s time-horizon
shrinks, roughly, to his life expectation. And he might now be less willing
than he was to fulfill that function of earning, saving and investing even if
he saw no reason to fear that the results would but swell his tax bills. 

<!-- 3 Effects on consumers’ budgets of the increasing eligibility of mass-produced
articles are enhanced by the price difference between them and the corresponding
custom-made articles which increases owing to the increase in wages pari passu with
t h e d e c r e a s e i n t h e r e l a t ive d e s i r a b i l i t y o f t h e l a t t e r ; t h e c a p i t a l i s t p r o c e s s
democratizes consumption.

4 “Seafaring is necessary, living is not necessary.” Inscription on an old house
in Bremen. -->


He drifts into an anti-saving frame of mind and accepts with an increasing
readiness anti-saving theories that are indicative of a short-run philosophy.
But anti-saving theories are not all that he accepts. With a different
attitude to the concern he works for and with a different scheme of private
life he tends to acquire a different view of the values and standards of the
capitalist order of things. Perhaps the most striking feature of the picture is
the extent to which the bourgeoisie, besides educating its own enemies,
allows itself in turn to be educated by them. It absorbs the slogans of current
radicalism and seems quite willing to undergo a process of conversion to a
creed hostile to its very existence. Haltingly and grudgingly it concedes in
part the implications of that creed. This would be most astonishing and
indeed very hard to explain were it not for the fact that the typical bourgeois
is rapidly losing faith in his own creed. And this again becomes fully
understandable as soon as we realize that the social conditions which account
for its emergence are passing.

This is verified by the very characteristic manner in which particular
capitalist interests and the bourgeoisie as a whole behave when facing direct
attack. They talk and plead—or hire people to do it for them; they snatch at
every chance of compromise; they are ever ready to give in; they never put
up a fight under the flag of their own ideals and interests—in this country
there was no real resistance anywhere against the imposition of crushing
financial burdens during the last decade or against labor legislation
incompatible with the effective management of industry. Now, as the reader
will surely know by this time, I am far from overestimating the political
power of either big business or the bourgeoisie in general. Moreover, I am
prepared to make large allowances for cowardice. But still, means of defense
were not entirely lacking as yet and history is full of examples of the success
of small groups who, believing in their cause, were resolved to stand by their
guns. The only explanation for the meekness we observe is that the bourgeois
order no longer makes any sense to the bourgeoisie itself and that, when all
is said and nothing is done, it does not really care.


<!-- 5 It has been said that in economic matters “the state can take the longer view.” But
excepting certain matters outside of party politics such as conservation of natural resources, it
hardly ever does. -->


Thus the same economic process that undermines the position of the bourgeoisie by decreasing the importance of the functions of entrepreneurs and capitalists, by breaking up protective strata and institutions, by creating
an atmosphere of hostility, also decomposes the motor forces of capitalism
from within. Nothing else shows so well that the capitalist order not only
rests on props made of extra-capitalist material but also derives its energy
from extra-capitalist patterns of behavior which at the same time it is bound
to destroy.

We have rediscovered what from different standpoints and, so I believe,
on inadequate grounds has often been discovered before: there is inherent
in the capitalist system a tendency toward self-destruction which, in its
earlier stages, may well assert itself in the form of a tendency toward
retardation of progress.

I shall not stay to repeat how objective and subjective, economic and
extra-economic factors, reinforcing each other in imposing accord, contribute
to that result. Nor shall I stay to show what should be obvious and in
subsequent chapters will become more obvious still, viz., that those factors
make not only for the destruction of the capitalist but for the emergence of
a socialist civilization. They all point in that direction. The capitalist process
not only destroys its own institutional framework but it also creates the
conditions for another. Destruction may not be the right word after all.
Perhaps I should have spoken of transformation. The outcome of the process
is not simply a void that could be filled by whatever might happen to turn
up; things and souls are transformed in such a way as to become increasingly
amenable to the socialist form of life. With every peg from under the
capitalist structure vanishes an impossibility of the socialist plan. In both
these respects Marx’s vision was right. We can also agree with him in linking
the particular social transformation that goes on under our eyes with an
economic process as its prime mover. What our analysis, if correct, disproves
is after all of secondary importance, however essential the role may be which
it plays in the socialist credo. In the end there is not so much difference as
one might think between saying that the decay of capitalism is due to its
success and saying that it is due to its failure.
But our answer to the question that heads this part posits far more
problems than it solves. 

1. So far we have not learned anything about the kind of socialism that may be looming in the future.

Marx and for most of his followers—
and this was and is one of the most serious shortcomings of their doctrine—
socialism meant just one definite thing. But the definiteness really goes no
further than nationalization of industry would carry us and with this an
indefinite variety of economic and cultural possibilities will be seen to be
compatible.

2. We know nothing as yet about the precise way by
which socialism may be expected to come except that there must be a great
many possibilities ranging from a gradual bureaucratization to the most
picturesque revolution. 

Strictly speaking we do not even know whether
socialism will actually come to stay. For to repeat: perceiving a tendency and
visualizing the goal of it is one thing and predicting that this goal will
actually be reached and that the resulting state of things will be workable,
let alone permanent, is quite another thing. Before humanity chokes (or
basks) in the dungeon (or paradise) of socialism it may well burn up in the
horrors (or glories) of imperialist wars. 6

3. The various components of the tendency we have been trying
to describe, while everywhere discernible, have as yet nowhere fully revealed
themselves. 

Things have gone to different lengths in different countries but
in no country far enough to allow us to say with any confidence precisely
how far they will go, or to assert that their “underlying trend” has grown too
strong to be subject to anything more serious than temporary reverses.

Industrial integration is far from being complete. Competition, actual and
potential, is still a major factor in any business situation. Enterprise is still
active, the leadership of the bourgeois group still the prime mover of the
economic process. The middle class is still a political power. Bourgeois
standards and bourgeois motivations though being increasingly impaired are
still alive. Survival of traditions—and family ownership of controlling parcels
of stock—still make many an executive behave as the owner-manager did
of old. The bourgeois family has not yet died; in fact, it clings to life so
tenaciously that no responsible politician has as yet dared to touch it by any
method other than taxation. From the standpoint of immediate practice as
well as for the purposes of shortrun forecasting—and in these things, a
century is a “short run” 7
—all this surface may be more important than the
tendency toward another civilization that slowly works deep down below.

<!-- 6 Written in the summer of 1935.
7 This is why the facts and arguments presented in this and the two preceding chapters do
not invalidate my reasoning about the possible economic results of another fifty years of
capitalist evolution. The thirties may well turn out to have been the last gasp of capitalism—
the likelihood of this is of course greatly increased by the current war. But again they may not.
In any case there are no purely economic reasons why capitalism should not have another
successful run which is all I wished to establish. -->

